---
title: "Dad's demise"
date: 2024-02-24
published: false
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - dad
---

Dad's demise.

call from nani annayya. managed to look at time, 4:36, "dad's not doing well, you might have to plan for travel"

Gradual realisation and confirmation that he is no more. First thoughts are with mom. 53 years of their marriage. She must have left in an hollow eternity. 

Could hear her weeping uncontrollably.

He has always been a strong man. Didn't let his disability slow him down in any way. 

What could have been his final thoughts. Kaivalya, thatha garu no more.

# Rituals

Allow some time for everyone to have final looks. 
I was asked to change to dhoti, baniyan and a towel on torso. The family of departed have to have food first after which everyone else had food.
A stretcher/bed(pade) made of bambook sticks tied together to be able to carry the cropse is being made by madel(chakali).
A clay pot to carry, ignited dried cow dung and a handle is made from coconut coir rope to carry. Three bamboo sticks are made in to a triangle, the clay pot with ignited fire is kept on the triange, the coconut coir rop is hung from three corners of the triange and the other ends of the rope are tied together to be able to carry it.

Some rice mixed with some coins was made as a bag and hanged on my neck. I have to carry it.

A chair with arm rests is placed and two lons(rokali) are placed beneath the chair to fora base.
Dad's frozen body is carried and placed on the chair.
Coconut Oil, Kunkudukai extract, turmeric, kukum were collected. All the near and dear are made to bath dad by applying oil and kunkudukai on head, three large vessels(bindelu) of water was used to wash the corpse. the final bath. and everyone else gathered would apply kukum.

Everyone lends a hand to carry dad on the pade and given garlands. The corpse was tied tight to pade with another coconut coir thread. I was given a weapon(katthi/kodavali) and the fire and was asked to lead the final journey of Father. For people from the gathered would breifly lift the bed and put down again three times(chanting narayana, narayana, narayana) before lifed and carry it on their shoulders.

During the journey, pade will be laid on ground twice and the first time, the madel will make four cross marks with the kodavali on four courners of the pade and I would put a handful mix of Rice and coins from towel bag on the three out of four markings.

The corpse was put into the van and I, bhagavan anaya, satya narayana, dhanaraju mavayya and madelu hop on the van. We travel to hindu burial ground constructed by Paidikondala Manikyala Rao near NIT and we continue the final journey to cremation place. Pade was put down again near shiva statue and the same kind of markings and offering were made by me.

I carry the fire, katthi and towel bag body was put on the cremation bed and the pade was made to throw to the other side from over the body. I take the holy bath so that every last bit of me including the towel bag was drenched and A large clay pot filled with water was given to me to carry on shoulders. All the clothes will be removed and soem green leaves were used to cover the private parts. 

I was asked to take the final look and insert a piece of gold inside dad's mouth.

I take three pradakshinas around the corpse whiel everyone else was laying a stick on the body. After frist pradakshina, a hole was made on the clay pot I was carrying and was asked where was I going, I reply Kasi. After the second one, another hole was made and I was going Gaya, Third one to Rameshwaram.

Rice from the towel bag and thrown back on dad without me looking and facing away. Standing near the head facing away, I ignire the fire and thake three steps ahead nad drop the clay pot which breaks behind me, and was escroted away and made to sit far away.

Dad's final journey complete. Dad's more of a emotional strength rather then physical. He always used to keep away from limelight and sit/sleep in corners. He always valued edjucation although he didn't manage to get a fiar one. All our respect lies in calling for him for tiny helps, relying on him keeping things in place and shouting at him for his forgetfulness about where kept things in different places. Jack of multiple trades; Drama Theatre artist, singer, dholak player, tailor, farmer.

For as far as I can remember, he's always had asthma. 

Strong memories: Him leaving me at a drwaing competition, buying me eraser and getting white charts.
Him elated with joy after finding out I managed to get 9th Rank in quarterly exams of my 5th class. He took my report card kept it cycle stand on the rear and get it xeroxed(he used to call it photostat) and posting it Guntur Chinnama's address.

Mom and dad always like cat/mouse, timon and pumba. 

Last words with daddy - 21 Feb 2025, 4:52PM(No timezone shown in call history) but I am looking at it in IST.
His last words with me: Kaivalya, Oyyyy Oyyyy



